welcome to the third episode of equation
stress where I take the most important
mathematical equations and then strip
them back layer by layer so that anyone
can understand this time we're looking
at the brainchild of Sir Isaac Newton
and German mathematician Gottfried
Leibniz which is calculus and this
equation tells you how to calculate the
rate at which a quantity changes whether
that's over time whether that's over
distance maybe you change pressure over
change of temperature you can change any
variable and you want to know how your
quantity will change as a result the
first layer is why this equation is so
important it's possibly one of the most
important areas or equations in all of
maths because calculus is how we model
the universe so all of your mathematical
and laws within physics that we use to
model behaviour that we feed to model
forces to model what's happening in the
universe they all rely on calculus and
calculating rates of change which is
exactly what this equation tells us how
to do so without knowing this equation
how to work out we have no relativity
known quantum mechanics no theory of
gravity every single physical law you
can think of pretty much relies on a
differential equation and without
calculus we have no differential
equations so instead to say that without
this equation we as scientists would not
be able to model the universe some of
the standard universe in the way that we
currently do for our second layer of the
calculus equation I'm going to give you
a concrete example of what the equation
actually stands for so in general is
telling you the instantaneous rate of
change of a quantity which sounds quite
abstract so the best way to think of
this
in terms of something like speed because
speed as you will know from your
speedometer in your car it's in miles
per hour or kilometers per hour its
distance per time so speed is distance
divided by time and to work out the the
speed of the Lewis Hamilton as uses a
lap of a a quad circuit you could just
measure the distance around the entire
circuit and the time it takes to do is
to do one lap and as you distance
divided by time gives you the feet so
say it's a hundred miles an hour but we
have got to know that at different
points around that circuit Luanne
Hamilton is not going 100 miles an hour
that's like is averaged over the whole
circuit because there might be a hairpin
turn so he's going go maybe 30 or 40 and
now on the pitch straight maybe give
each is 200 or something so speed is
constantly changing and if you want to
know the speed has exactly one point in
time or one point on the track you need
some way of getting that instantaneous
measurement so you might think that
instead of measuring the whole lap and
the whole time to do one lap let's just
measure the length of the pit street and
the time it takes them to do that or
let's measure the distance he travels
over a 10 second period or a one second
period and you would get better and
better estimates for his instantaneous
speed but you'll never quite exactly at
that instant in time you get closer and
closer and closer by making smaller and
smaller time interval measurements so 10
second 1 seconds maybe Northpoint or 1
seconds I never quite get there and to
actually get an instantaneous
measurement you have to follow a very
well-defined mathematical procedure and
it's like a a blueprint or like an
instruction manual and this equation is
that blueprint is that instruction
manual and tells you how to get that
instantaneous measurement so to get the
speed at exactly one point it
one exact point in time you can work out
the speed of Lewis Hamilton now we strip
back to the third layer of the calculus
equation I'm going to explain what a
limit means mathematically because we
have this limit function here we need to
know how to take that limit to
understand this equation and to work out
the rate of change of a quantity it's
actually the same as working out the
gradient or the slope of the graph of
that quantity so here we have this
function f and if I draw the graph say
it looks like this you shape then the
rate of change of our quantity of our
function is just its gradient that
explains how it's changing so it's slope
and to estimate the slope of a graph the
easiest way to do it is with a straight
line because it's very easy to calculate
the slope of a straight line it's just
the height divided by the width so to
estimate the gradient of our grasp what
we would do is take a point T and then
go a line up to our graph and that is
the value of our quantity s at the point
t then you increase T a little bit so T
at time you go a little bit further
forward in time to P plus h where H is
just some small amount and a P for page
are going to have a different value as
we would expect because it's changing we
want to know the rate of how it's
changing so I have a different value
which is f of T plus h to calculate what
the gradient is here we can estimate it
with a straight line you can see it's
not exact but it gives you an
approximation and the approximation is
simply the height has T plus h minus f
of T divided by the width people say to
mind seems to hate and you'll hopefully
have noticed that in
three what's in here now what taking the
limit as H tends to 0 means on a graph
is basically this point here our t plus
h of second point it's a little ahead of
our first one it just means take that
closer and closer and closer to our
original point I'll do an example if we
take this point here then you would draw
your line up you hit your curve you go
across and you get a new value for your
function so we now have a new height and
we have a new width and we can estimate
the gradient the slope by drawing
another straight line and you can see on
the graph that our second straight line
is a better estimate or a better
approximation of the slope than our
first one so we're taking my point
closer and closer and closer we get
better and better and better
approximations for the slope at this
point I think we go all the way until we
hit it then we get the exact value and
that is exactly what this equation is
telling them it's saying take your time
interval shorter a shorter and shorter
until it's eventually at the same time
and as long as you do this in a well
defined mathematical web you will get
the exact rate of change the exact slope
at that point and you've got a speed for
the fourth and final layer I'm going to
explain each term so sort of break it
down to the finest pieces so start with
on the left hand side of the equals we
have this term D s so these means rate
of change and we want to work out the
rate of change of our quantity our
function f so for the speed example we
want to know the rate of change of
distance and the DT on the bottom on the
denominator is what you want to know the
rate of change with respect to what so
the D means with respect
- and the tea is your other variable so
here at time piece of time and again if
you're working up speed you want to know
how your distance changes with respect
to time now moving to the right hand
side of the equals we have the limit
function so Li and Lim that means take
the limit and taking a limit is a
mathematical function it's very well
defined mathematically those are sort of
various rules you have to follow when
you take a limit and I won't go into the
full details but this bit here Lim is
telling you to do that and to follow
those rules the H arrow zero bit is
telling you that your time interval
which is H is tending to zero so you're
taking the limit as H tends to 0 or at
age becomes very very small next up we
have a sort of most important part of
this equation the bit we're taking the
limit off and so really understand what
this is saying we just go back to the
third layer and I'll graph because it's
just estimating the slope because if you
remember the rate of change is just the
slope and the best approximation for the
slope is a straight line so the top part
of the equation is just new value minus
old value the height the bottom part is
again T plus h minus T H the interval
the width and so one divided by the
other is going to give you those a
gradient on that straight line and then
you take the limit and you'll bring the
points closer and closer together like
we did on the graph so that's it we've
stripped back all four layers of the
calculus equation and now hopefully you
have much more of an idea of why this
equation is so important in math and
physics so thank you very much for
watching and don't forget to tune in
next time and in the meantime you can
follow me on facebook twitter instagram
at tom rock math and do check out my
website tom rocks mass comm thank you